.\"The Simple_shell is a project for Holberton school
.\"	Author : Omar Cherni <3639@holbertonschool.com>

.Dd December 05, 2021
.Os
.Dt SIMPLE_SHELL 1
.Sh NAME
.Nm simple_shell
.Nd command interpreter (shell)
.Sh SYNOPSIS
.Nm
.Bk -words
.Op Fl aCefnuvxIimqVEb
.Op Cm +aCefnuvxIimqVEb
.Ek
.Bk -words
.Op Fl o Ar option_name
.Op Cm +o Ar option_name
.Ek
.Bk -words
.Op Ar command_file Oo Ar argument ... Oc

.Sh DESCRIPTION
.Nm
is meant to mimic the standard command interpreter for the system.
The current version of
.Nm
is in the process of being changed as it is part of a learning process.
This version has many
features which make it appear similar in some respects to the dash command interpreter (shell), but it is not a clone.
Only features designated by
This man page is not intended
to be a tutorial or a complete specification of the shell.
.Ss Overview
The shell is a command that reads lines from either a file or the
terminal, interprets them, and generally executes other commands.
It is the program that is running when a user logs into the system
(although a user can select a different shell with the
.Xr chsh 1
command).
The shell implements a language that has flow control
constructs, a macro facility that provides a variety of features in
addition to data storage, along with built in history and line editing
capabilities.
It incorporates many features to aid interactive use and
has the advantage that the interpretative language is common to both
interactive and non-interactive use (shell scripts).
That is, commands
can be typed directly to the running shell or can be put into a file and
the file can be executed directly by the shell.
.Ss Invocation
The command ./hsh will open the terminal, in the meanwhile, this shell ignore aditional arguments, once the shell is open by using enter, the prompt will remain open waiting the user to insert commands.
When first starting,
the shell inspects argument 0, it determines it this argument is an executable file, in such case, it is executed, if not, the shell, investigates it the file is a directory, if not, the shell goes and checks if the argument is a built-in function or it is  part of an executable in the ENV variable (checking in all directories in said variable),
After that , the shell reviews the arguments giving, an will pass those to the corresponding process.
If command line arguments besides the options have been specified, then
the shell treats the first argument as the name of a file from which to
read commands (a shell script), and the remaining arguments are set as the
positional parameters of the shell ($1, $2, etc).
Otherwise, the shell
reads commands from its standard input.
.Ss Argument List Processing

The list is under construction for this first release.
.Ss Lexical Structure

The shell reads input in terms of lines from a file and breaks it up into words at whitespace (blanks and tabs),
and at certain sequences of characters that are special to the shell called operators.  There are two types of
operators: control operators and redirection operators but those are not included in this first shell release.

.Ss Dynamic mode
In the dynamic mode, the simple_shell awaits the user to put the commands to be executed, once those are in the standard input, they are executed.


.Ss Static mode
In the static mode, parameter are passed not from standar input but rather piped from another file or process. The syntaxis would be like below:

echo "qwerty" | ./hsh
in which case the result will be:
./hsh: 1: qwerty: not found

cat test_ls_2 | ./hsh
in which case the result will be:
whatever execution inside the file test_ls_s


.&  &&
.It "Redirection operators:"
.This operation is not available yet
.Ss Quoting
Quoting is used to remove the special meaning of certain characters or
words to the shell, such as operators, whitespace, or keywords.
There are three types of quoting: matched single quotes,
matched double quotes, and backslash. Said features are not available in this first version of shell.
.Ss Backslash
A backslash preserves the literal meaning of the following
character, with the exception of
.Aq newline .
A backslash preceding a
.Aq newline
is treated as a line continuation. This feature is not available int this version of shell.
.Ss Single Quotes
Enclosing characters in single quotes preserves the literal meaning of all
the characters (except single quotes, making it impossible to put
single-quotes in a single-quoted string). This feature is not available yet in this version of shell.
.Ss Double Quotes
Enclosing characters within double quotes preserves the literal
meaning of all characters except dollarsign, this functionality is yet to be built.
.Ss Reserved Words
This version of shell does not have yet the reserved words feature.
.Ss Aliases
This feature is not supported yet.
.Ss Commands
The shell interprets the words it reads according to a language, the
specification of which is outside the scope of this man page (refer to the
BNF in the
.Tn POSIX
1003.2 document).
.Ss Simple Commands and redirections.
They are not available yet in this version.

.Ss Search and Execution
There are three types of commands: shell functions, builtin commands, and
normal programs -- and the command is searched for (by name) in that order.
They each are executed in a different way.
.Pp
When a shell function is executed, all of the shell positional parameters
(except $0, which remains unchanged) are set to the arguments of the shell
function.
The variables which are explicitly placed in the environment of
the command (by placing assignments to them before the function name) are
made local to the function and are set to the values given.
Then the command given in the function definition is executed.
The positional parameters are restored to their original values

.Pp
Shell builtins are executed internally to the shell, without spawning a
new process.
.Pp
Otherwise, if the command name doesn't match a function or builtin, the
command is searched for as a normal program in the file system (as
described in the next section).
When a normal program is executed, the shell runs the program,
passing the arguments and the environment to the program.
If the program is not a normal executable file (i.e., if it does
not begin with the "magic number" whose
.Tn ASCII
representation is "#!", so
.Xr execve 2
returns
.Er ENOEXEC
then) the shell will interpret the program in a subshell.
The child shell will reinitialize itself in this case,
so that the effect will be as if a
new shell had been invoked to handle the ad-hoc shell script, except that
the location of hashed commands located in the parent shell will be
remembered by the child.
.Ss Path Search
When locating a command, the shell first looks to see if it has a shell
function by that name.
Then it looks for a builtin command by that name.
If a builtin command is not found, one of two things happen:
.Bl -enum
.It
Command names containing a slash are simply executed without performing
any searches.
.It
The shell searches each entry in
.Ev PATH
in turn for the command.
The value of the
.Ev PATH
variable should be a series of entries separated by colons.
Each entry consists of a directory name.
The current directory may be indicated
implicitly by an empty directory name, or explicitly by a single period.
.El
.Ss Command Exit Status
Each command has an exit status that can influence the behaviour
of other shell commands.
The paradigm is that a command exits
with zero for normal or success.
The other programs used for the contruction of this simple_shell, return to other functions or 1 to the main function, this allows to guarantee that only the exit command or the ctr-D commands have the right to turn off the shell.
.Ss Pipelines
A pipeline is a sequence of one or more commands separated
by the control operator |.
The standard output of all but
the last command is connected to the standard input
of the next command.
This simple_shell has not yet the pipeline feature.
.Ss Background Commands -- &
If a command is terminated by the control operator ampersand (&), the
shell executes the command asynchronously -- that is, the shell does not
wait for the command to finish before executing the next command. This feature is under construction.

.Ss Lists -- Generally Speaking
This functionality is not support yet.
.Ss Short-Circuit List Operators
This functionality is not supported yet.

.Ss Special Parameters
This shell does not support special parameters yet.
.Ss Word Expansions
This simple_shells does not support word expansions yet.
.Ss Shell Patterns
This functionality is not supported yet.

.Ss Builtins
This section lists the builtin commands which are builtin because they
need to perform some operation that can't be performed by a separate
process.
In addition to these, there are several other commands that may
be builtin for efficiency (
.Xr printf 1 ,
.Xr env 1 ,
.Xr exit 1 ,
).
.Ic printf
formats and prints its arguments, after the first, under control
of the
.Ar format  .
The
.Ar format
is a character string which contains three types of objects: plain characters,
which are simply copied to standard output, character escape sequences which
are converted and copied to the standard output, and format specifications,
each of which causes printing of the next successive
.Ar argument  .
.Pp
The
.Ar arguments
after the first are treated as strings if the corresponding format is
either
.Cm b ,
.Cm c
or
.Cm s ;
otherwise it is evaluated as a C constant, with the following extensions:
.Pp
.Bl -bullet -offset indent -compact
.It
A leading plus or minus sign is allowed.
.It
If the leading character is a single or double quote, the value is the
.Tn ASCII
code of the next character.
.El
.Pp
The format string is reused as often as necessary to satisfy the
.Ar arguments  .
Any extra format specifications are evaluated with zero or the null
string.


Each format specification is introduced by the percent character
(``%'').


.It Format :
A character which indicates the type of format to use (one of
.Cm diouxXfwEgGbcs ) .
.El
.Pp
A field width or precision may be
.Sq Cm \&*
instead of a digit string.
In this case an
.Ar argument
supplies the field width or precision.
.Pp
The format characters and their meanings are:
.Bl -tag -width Fl
.It Cm  i and d
The
.Ar argument
is printed as a signed decimal (d or i).
.It Cm s
Characters from the string
.Ar argument
are printed until the end is reached or until the number of characters
indicated by the precision specification is reached; if the
precision is omitted, all characters in the string are printed.
.It Cm \&%
Print a `%'; no argument is used.

.Sh EXIT STATUS
Errors that are detected by the shell, such as a syntax error, will cause the
shell to exit with a non-zero exit status.
If the shell is not an
interactive shell, the execution of the shell file will be aborted.
Otherwise
the shell will return the exit status of the last command executed, or
if the exit builtin is used with a numeric argument, it will return the
argument.
.Sh ENVIRONMENT
.Bl -tag -width MAILCHECK
.It Ev HOME
Set automatically by
.Xr login 1
from the user's login directory in the password file
.Pq Xr passwd 4 .
This environment variable also functions as the default argument for the
cd builtin.
.It Ev PATH
The default search path for executables.
See the above section
.Sx Path Search .
.It Ev CDPATH
The search path used with the cd builtin.
.It Ev MAIL
The name of a mail file, that will be checked for the arrival of new mail.
Overridden by
.Ev MAILPATH .

.It Ev MAILCHECK
The frequency in seconds that the shell checks for the arrival of mail
in the files specified by the
.Ev MAILPATH
or the
.Ev MAIL
file.
If set to 0, the check will occur at each prompt.
.It Ev MAILPATH
A colon
.Dq \&:
separated list of file names, for the shell to check for incoming mail.
This environment setting overrides the
.Ev MAIL
setting.
There is a maximum of 10 mailboxes that can be monitored at once.
.It Ev PS1
The primary prompt string, which defaults to

.Dq $\  ,
unless you are the superuser, in which case it defaults to
.Dq #\  .
.It Ev PS2
The secondary prompt string, which defaults to
.Dq \*[Gt]\  .

.It Ev PS4
Output before each line when execution trace (set -x) is enabled,
defaults to
.Dq +\  .
.It Ev IFS
Input Field Separators.
This is normally set to
.Aq space ,
.Aq tab ,
and
.Aq newline .
See the
.Sx White Space Splitting
section for more details.
.It Ev TERM
The default terminal setting for the shell.
This is inherited by
children of the shell, and is used in the history editing modes.
.It Ev HISTSIZE
The number of lines in the history buffer for the shell.
.It Ev PWD
The logical value of the current working directory.  This is set by the
.Ic cd
command.
.It Ev OLDPWD
The previous logical value of the current working directory.  This is set by
the
.Ic cd
command.
.It Ev PPID
The process ID of the parent process of the shell.
